---
title: "Natural Language Processing (NLP) Projects using ChatGPT and more"
slug: nlp-projects-chat-gpt
authors: [leejaeka, ]
tags: [ChatGPT, Natural Language Processing, AI, Illness Report, Food Classification]
hide_table_of_contents: false
description: In this article, we are excited to be at the forefront of this exciting and rapidly developing technology and to share a few of our projects for demonstration.
---

In this article, we are excited to be at the forefront of this exciting and
rapidly developing technology and to share a few of our projects for
demonstration.

<!-- truncate -->

---

<div className="flex-container">

<div className="flex-item" style={{flex: 1}}>

## Introduction

![ChatGPT logo.](./img/1.png)

</div>

<div className="flex-item" style={{flex: 2}}>

Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Natural Language Processing (NLP) have become
increasingly important in the modern world. With the rise of conversational
interfaces, chatbots, and virtual assistants, NLP has become a crucial tool for
improving communication between humans and machines. One of the most impressive
NLP models in recent times is ChatGPT, a large language model trained by OpenAI
based on the GPT-3.5 architecture. ChatGPT has the ability to understand natural
language and generate human-like responses to a wide variety of prompts.

In spite of its impressive capabilities, users may have encountered limitations
when using ChatGPT for very specific tasks, such as providing accurate
historical information about countries. As with any AI system, ChatGPT has its
limitations and can benefit from additional training to improve its accuracy and
effectiveness for specific tasks.

As data scientists, we are constantly working to refine and finetune ChatGPT and
other NLP models to better fit the needs of our clients. By customizing these
models to work with specific data sets and tasks, we can make previously
unavailable functionalities possible. In this article, we are excited to be at
the forefront of this exciting and rapidly developing technology and to share a
few of our projects for demonstration.

</div>

</div>

---

<div className="flex-container">

<div className="flex-item" style={{flex: 1}}>

![A minimalist illustration of a woman with a thermometer in her mouth, holding
her head with one hand, indicating a fever or headache.](./img/2.png)

</div>

<div className="flex-item" style={{flex: 2}}>

## Project #1 IMS (Incident Management System) Illness Report Classification Project

### Objective (Project #1)

The aim of this project is to develop an efficient pipeline that can
automatically detect illness reports within English documents (pdfs) using
Artificial Intelligence (AI). The pipeline will utilise NLP techniques to read
and summarize documents that are specifically focused on illness reporting
topics. The ultimate goal is to enable the client to process large volumes of
such documents in a matter of minutes, which will help to save time and increase
efficiency.

</div>

</div>

<div className="flex-container">

<div className="flex-item" style={{flex: 1}}>

### Potential Usage (Project #1)

1. Allows for a retrospective analysis of incidents
2. QA of structured data via comparative text analysis for Data analytics and
   Departmental Performance Reports (Current Example)
3. Supporting systematic reviews of incidents for  administrative, Scientific or
   strategic analysis. (To pilot)
4. Combining 1-3 for potential real-time support for possible pathways.
   ​​​​​​​(To pilot)

Support reporting to Treasury Board on Departmental result Indicator - A
majority (more than 84%) of high risk recalls are issued before illness being
reported to CFIA.

</div>

<div className="flex-item" style={{flex: 1}}>

### Deliverable (Project #1)

As the final outcome of this project, the client will receive a web application
connected to a trained machine learning model and the pipeline. The application
will have the capability to process a large number of English documents focused
on illness reporting topics. ​​​​​​​

### Phase (Project #1)

Currently, the project is in the testing and implementation phase, where
different models are being developed to fit illness data. Based on the results,
finetuned ChatGPT-3 has shown promising outcomes and has been deployed. The next
step is to finalize this deliverable for the client.

</div>

</div>

### Next Step (Project #1)

Illness detection can be a stepping stone to expand the project to a general
question answering AI tool. This is being discussed with the client Devendra and
he’s shown great interest.

---

<div className="flex-container">

<div className="flex-item" style={{flex: 1}}>

![Photo of a table spread with six bowls filled with assorted charcuterie and
meats](./img/3.png)

</div>

<div className="flex-item" style={{flex: 2}}>

## Project #2 Meat HS Classification Project (2022 Jan-Nov)

### Objective (Project #2)

An Artificial Intelligence-powered text classification initiative is underway to
automate the manual labelling process of a substantial HS (Harmonized System)
data file. The system's input is human-generated descriptions of food products,
and the output is the categorization of the text into various meat categories,
such as Raw or Ready-to-Eat, determined by the AI model.​​​​​​​

### Potential Usage (Project #2)

The client specified that their intent in this project was for research
purposes.

</div>

</div>

<div className="flex-container">

<div className="flex-item" style={{flex: 1}}>

### Method (Project #2)

The project leverages state-of-the-art natural language processing techniques,
specifically the BERT transformer model, to efficiently analyse vast volumes of
text. This will provide relevant stakeholders with a more profound understanding
of their data, eliminating the need for manual review and labelling of thousands
of entries. The result will be a substantial reduction in the time and effort
required to gain insight into the data.

</div>

<div className="flex-item" style={{flex: 1}}>

### Result (Project #2)

Client provided training data which was used to train the BERT model. The model
was able to accurately label bigger categories such as Poultry, Beef, Pork and
Alligator meat (99%+ accuracy). However, it had a difficult time labelling very
specific categories (80% accuracy) such as raw beef vs canned beef as training
data lacked patterns and details.

</div>

</div>

<div className="flex-container">

<div className="flex-item" style={{flex: 1}}>

### Deliverable (Project #2)

As the final deliverable of this project, the client will receive a program that
can process their input requests. The program will label and generate a .csv
file for the client.

</div>

<div className="flex-item" style={{flex: 1}}>

### Next Step (Project #2)

Client mentioned potential project for fish classification in the future

</div>

</div>

---

<div className="flex-container">

<div className="flex-item" style={{flex: 1}}>

![Screenshot of our translation software interface showing text input and
language selection options.](./img/4.png)

</div>

<div className="flex-item" style={{flex: 2}}>

## Project #3 English & French Translator App (2022 Sept-2023)

### Objective (Project #3)

The Eng-Fr, Fr-Eng Translator App aims to translate and summarise classified
documents securely on CFIA servers. It aims to solve the lack of data privacy of
Google Translate whilst maintaining the translation accuracy level of DeepL
Translate using a Machine Learning model, BERT.

### Potential Usage (Project #3)

1. Quick translation to any of the following documents - .pdfs, .docx, .txt,
   .pptx
2. Quick summarisation of corpus of text to reduce manual reading time

</div>

</div>

<div className="flex-container">

<div className="flex-item" style={{flex: 1}}>

### Deliverable (Project #3)

As the final deliverable of this project, the clients with access to CFIA VPN
can use the web application found
[here](https://translatorv1.azurewebsites.net/). Client can drag&drop, upload or
type directly to get translation of the input document. Text-summary feature can
be used on the same input to give a summarisation of the input document.

Try out the translator [here](https://translatorv1.azurewebsites.net/).

</div>

<div className="flex-item" style={{flex: 1}}>

### Phase (Project #3)

Deployed and ready at any time.

### Next Step (Project #3)

The app is expandable to better model plus more functionalities. Since it
utilises ChatGPT backend, not only can it summarise, it can do many other tasks.

</div>

</div>

---

<div className="flex-container">

<div className="flex-item" style={{flex: 1}}>

## Conclusion

![Portrait of an anthropomorphic robot touching its chin in a thoughtful
pose.](./img/5.png)

</div>

<div className="flex-item" style={{flex: 2}}>

In conclusion, the development of NLP technology has brought about a new era of
human-machine interaction, making it possible for us to communicate with
machines in ways that were previously unimaginable. With the advent of ChatGPT
and other advanced NLP models, we have seen significant improvements in the
accuracy and effectiveness of conversational interfaces, chatbots, and virtual
assistants.

Through the examples we have explored in this article, it is clear that NLP
technology has the potential to revolutionize a wide range of industries and
applications here at CFIA. By harnessing the power of NLP, we can develop more
effective and efficient ways to communicate with users and customers, ultimately
driving better outcomes for businesses and individuals alike.

However, as with any new technology, there are also challenges that must be
addressed. Ethical concerns around data privacy and bias in AI systems are
important considerations that must be carefully managed as NLP technology
continues to evolve. Additionally, data security is a big concern that is why
our team is cooperating closely with Microsoft Teams to ensure the safety and
privacy of the data processed by the AI.

At the same time, we are excited about the opportunities that lie ahead in the
field of NLP. As data scientists, we are committed to continuing to refine and
improve ChatGPT and other NLP models, so that we can develop even more powerful
tools to support human-machine interaction and drive innovation in a wide range
of industries. We are confident that the future of NLP is bright, and we look
forward to being a part of this exciting journey.

</div>

</div>
