---
sidebar_position: 1
---

# Dev-Rel-Docs

Welcome to the Developer Related Docs! These docs serve as a knowledge base
containing essential resources, guides, and best practices for developers
closely associated with our projects.

---

[Training for new
developers](https://github.com/ai-cfia/dev-rel-docs/blob/main/TRAINING.md) : A
curriculum to train new team members on the basics.

[Architecture Decision
Records](https://github.com/ai-cfia/dev-rel-docs/blob/main/adr/index.md) : A
list of all our ADRs.

[Development Environment Setup
Guide](https://github.com/ai-cfia/dev-rel-docs/blob/main/Development-Environment-Setup-Guide/DEV-ENV-SETUP.md)
: A guide to setting up a development environment with Dev Containers.

[TypeScript React Setup
Guide](https://github.com/ai-cfia/dev-rel-docs/blob/main/TypeScript-React-Setup-Guide/REACTSETUP.md)
: A comprehensive guide to setting up a TypeScript React project with ESLint and
Prettier.

[TypeScript App Versioning
Guide](https://github.com/ai-cfia/dev-rel-docs/blob/main/TypeScript-AppVersion/APPVERSION-SETUP.md)
: Guide to Setting Up Application Versioning in a TypeScript React Project.

[Minimal Python Backend Setup
Guide](https://github.com/ai-cfia/dev-rel-docs/blob/main/Minimal-Backend-Setup-Guides/PYTHON-BACKEND-SETUP.md)
: A guide to quickly spinning up a minimal python backend using Flask, including
dev containers configurations.

[Naming
things](https://github.com/ai-cfia/dev-rel-docs/blob/main/adr/008-naming-convention.md)
: A document outlining standard naming conventions for resources.

[TypeScript Environment Variables Setup
Guide](https://github.com/ai-cfia/dev-rel-docs/blob/main/TypeScript-EnvironmentVariables/ENVIRONMENT-VARIABLES-SETUP.md)
: Documentation that provides step-by-step instructions on how to set up and
effectively manage environment variables in a TypeScript project. The guide
emphasizes best practices, security considerations, and offers a structured
approach to seamlessly integrate environment variables into your development
workflow.

[CONTRIBUTING.md](https://github.com/ai-cfia/.github/blob/main/profile/CONTRIBUTING.md)
: This document provides detailed guidelines for contributing to all
repositories in the AI Lab GitHub. It includes information on best practices,
code submission processes, and how to propose changes or improvements. We
encourage all contributors to read it before beginning to contribute.

---

We hope you find the Developer Related Documentation helpful and engaging. If
you have any questions or need assistance, please reach out to the CFIA AI Lab
team.

Happy developing!
