---
sidebar_position: 2
---

# The Software development team

## Current team

### [Clement Deffes](https://www.linkedin.com/in/clement-deffes)

**Howdy!** I am Cl√©ment Deffes, and I am a Communication intern at the Canadian
Food Inspection Agency AI Lab.

I‚Äôm currently completing my onboarding process. But soon, I'll be working on the
AI Lab website and everything linked to the Communication aspect in this branch.

This internship is part of my Computer Enginnering formation at the √âcole de
Technologie Sup√©rieure. I like to learn new things and I hope that my passage at
the ACIA will bring me new knowledges.

- [Courriel](clement.deffes@inspection.gc.ca)

### [Maxence Guindon](https://www.linkedin.com/in/maxenceguindon)

Hello! My name is Maxence Guindon, and I am a backend developer at the Canadian
Food Inspection Agency AI Lab.

I‚Äôm currently working on Nachet, a web application using computer vision AI
models, which is designed to help CFIA seed analysts identify seeds from images
taken from digital microscopes. More specifically, my role in the backend is to
make sure that the frontend, the database, and the AI model are able to talk to
each other. "But how?" you might ask. By building efficient APIs and routes for
data to travel safely.

Before that, I worked for a local escape game, where I was a game master.
Working for a small company, I had the opportunity to test my skills in
different areas and propose innovative solutions. During the pandemic, I
proposed a system to fuse the hints system and the video story introduction.
Since then, I've followed the path of the programmer.

- Mail: [Courriel](maxence.guindon@inspection.gc.ca)

### [Kabir, Ibrahim](https://www.linkedin.com/in/ibrahimkabir/) - Backend

**Hello everyone!** üëã

I am Ibrahim Kabir, a backend developer in the AI Lab team, and my role involves
designing and implementing the server-side logic that powers our AI solutions.

With a degree in electronics, I discovered my passion for computer science.
Being a backend developer at CFIA is a way for me to nurture this passion and
continually expand my knowledge.

- Email : [Courriel](ibrahim.kabir@inspection.gc.ca)

### [Cardin, Thomas](https://www.linkedin.com/in/thomas-cardin/) - DevOps

Hello, I'm Thomas Cardin, a DevOps Specialist at CFIA. My job is to streamline
software development and deployment to improve system reliability and
efficiency. I'll enforce security to protect our operations and align with SRE
practices to ensure our infrastructure's scalability and continuous service
delivery.

### [Allagbe, Kotchikpa Guy-Landry](https://www.linkedin.com/in/guy-landry-allagbe/) - Backend

üëã Hey there, fellow tech enthusiasts!

I've recently embarked on an exhilarating journey with CFIA's AI Lab as their
newest Backend Developer. Here's a little glimpse into my daily adventures:

Backend Ballet: Seamlessly integrating databases, servers, and all the
behind-the-scenes magic to make our applications sing. API Artistry: Designing,
sculpting, and refining the APIs that fuel our front-end escapades. Efficiency
Engineer: Regularly diving deep to optimize performance, ensuring our apps run
smooth.

For those who know me, you're probably aware of my (borderline obsessive)
passion for all things Python, AI, and the vast realm of the web.

There's a saying that goes: "Love what you do, and you'll never work a day in
your life." Well, I'd tweak that a bit: "Love what you do, especially when it
works!" üòÑ Debugging aside, there's nothing more exhilarating than seeing code
spring to life in perfect harmony.

Curious to connect or dive deeper into my professional odyssey? üßê Feel free to
check out my [LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/in/guy-landry-allagbe). Let's
foster connections and share knowledge!

Cheers to new beginnings and endless lines of code!

### [Lemire, William](https://www.linkedin.com/in/wlemire/) - Backend

Hello! My name is William Lemire, and I am a Backend Application Developer in
the AI Lab team.

Before COVID, I worked in the communications/marketing field, holding a
Bachelor's degree in Public Relations from UQAM. As I progressed in my career, I
increasingly realized the impact artificial intelligence (AI) was going to have
in this sector in the coming years. Therefore, I decided to make a switch to
software engineering, eager to be part of this new technological revolution that
is set to transform all areas of society.

Thanks to the AI Lab, I have the opportunity to work on exciting projects that
utilize emerging technologies. Additionally, this initiative by the Canadian
Food Inspection Agency demonstrates a commitment to innovation, and it's an
honor to contribute to its mission.

### [Lopez, Jonathan](https://www.linkedin.com/in/lopez-jonathan/) - DevSecOps

Hi everyone! I'm Jonathan Lopez, currently diving into the world of software
engineering at √âcole de technologie sup√©rieure (√âTS). I've joined the CFIA AI
Lab DevSecOps team, where I'll be mixing up a special blend of software
development, security, and ops.

My role primarily revolves around the practices of DevOps and Site Reliability
Engineering (SRE), focusing on automating workflows to streamline our processes.
This not only enhances efficiency but also ensures that our path from
development to deployment is as smooth and error-free as possible. I'm
passionate about using modern tools and practices to refine our development
pipeline, reducing the time from concept to product and ensuring high-quality
outputs.

Being part of a team that values innovation and continuous improvement is truly
exciting, and I look forward to making significant contributions to our
projects.

Outside of work, I'm just as passionate about exploring and learning. In my
downtime, I run my own homelab, diving into Kubernetes to enhance my technical
expertise. Feel free to approach me for anything - whether it's project-related
or just to share ideas and insights. I'm here to learn & contribute. üòÑ

### [Thomassin, Jolan](https://www.linkedin.com/in/jolan-thomassin/) - Base de donn√©es

**Hello !** üëã

I'm **Jolan Thomassin**, an enthusiastic database manager at **CFIA/ACIA**
(Canadian Inspection Food Agency). My role involves working with databases, and
contributing to the efficient management of information.

My interest in IT dates back to my childhood and I have always enjoyed solving
the different challenges that came my way. I particularly **like algorithms,
artificial intelligence, robotics and the creation of video games**. I am a
conscientious, perfectionist and attentive person, essential qualities to
succeed in this field.

I like to do lots of different projects, which I list on [my
website](https://jolanthomassin.fr). I hope to be able to continue working on
many different things and to increase my programming  skills in the future.

I hope we can get along, and build the technological world of tomorrow !

- Email : [Courriel](jolan.thomassin@inspection.gc.ca)

## Former team members

### [Fressard, M√©lanie](https://www.linkedin.com/in/melanie-fressard/) - Base de donn√©es

Hello! My name is M√©lanie Fressard, and I am a Database Manager in the AI Lab
team at the CFIA (Canadian Food Inspection Agency). My role involves evolving
the database to enhance information processing and management.

I am very excited to work on such a project, as artificial intelligence and
database management are fields rich in knowledge.

- Email: [Courriel](melanie.fressard@inspection.gc.ca)

### [Tarzalt, Reda](https://www.linkedin.com/in/tarzaltreda/) - DevOps

Hello, my username is @redat97. I am happy to announce my role as a DevOps
Engineer at CFIA. My primary responsibilities include ensuring the reliability
and efficiency of our technical processes as well as making sure a strong level
of security is maintained. I am thrilled to be a part of the team that is making
this project possible !
